<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
                <html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
                <head>
                <link href="page_styles.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
                <title>Prologue</title>
                </head>

                <body>

                    <h1>Prologue</h1>

	                <p>The young man and the old master stood on opposite sides of the bridge. It wasn't a very long bridge, maybe thirty or forty yards across. It was made of wood and curved gently over the stream below. The stream was only knee height at its deepest, so the bridge was as much for ornament as it was for function. But it was the only proper entrance to the grounds of the old monastery.</p>
<p>The young man stood on the outside looking in. He remembered these grounds. He had been an apprentice here not all that long ago. He was no longer welcome.</p>
<p>The young man spoke first. "Do you know why I am here?"</p>
<p>"I do."</p>
<p>The young man chose to stand another moment in silence. It was night, and the crescent moon was high in the sky. He enjoyed the cool breeze against his face and hair.</p>
<p>Then his posture shifted slightly and his staff tapped gently on the wood below his feet. The master shifted at the same moment. The duel had begun.</p>
<p>The young man focused. He was master of a secret power. If he calmed his mind, he could perceive the future. Not perfectly, of course. The future could never be perceived perfectly. It was always changing, shifting. But he could see the future as a web of possibility, infinite in complexity. Some paths stood out as especially likely, and they were like clearly marked roads. But other less probable paths spun out in other directions, perceptible to his mind, but only barely, like dim trails through a strange forest.</p>
<p>He calmed himself further. He smoothed away the emotions of the outside world. He set aside his craving and desire. His mind emptied. And new things rushed in. The paths of the future exploded before him. What before was dim was now bright and easily perceived. His mind grew, comprehending the complexity before it.</p>
<p>The young man then made the first move. He chose a path that looked favorable to him. He glanced into it. On this path, he saw himself dash forward, block a strike from the old man, dodge to the left, and then sweep the old man's ankles.</p>
<p>Even as he perceived this possibility, it winked out of existence. The old man was master of the same power. He too was focusing his mind, peering into the many futures that could come to pass. By perceiving this particular possibility, the young man had brought it to the old man's attention. Then, once the old man knew of it, the possibility became impossible. The old man would not allow it to happen. Thus, it disappeared. What once could have been could no longer be.</p>
<p>The young man perceived several other strands of the future begin to grow in prominence, slowly turning from unlikely to likely. In one of them, the old man blocked a strike, then grabbed the hood of the young man's cloak, throwing him sharply to the ground, knocking him out. This was a path down which the old man would win. But now that the young man saw it, the path faded. Just as the old man had done, by perceiving this possibility, the young man countered it.</p>
<p>Lesser warriors would have been attacking each other, staffs twirling, robes flared in motion, pushing their skills to the limit. But in this contest, between these two men, there was no need for such things. Both of them could see into the future with extraordinary skill and precision. But nobody can see the future perfectly. The winner of this battle would be whoever could perceive the paths of the future further and more clearly than the other.</p>
<p>Standing perfectly still, the two of them battled ferociously, each trying to get a step ahead of the other.</p>
<p>Finally though, the paths of the future converged. The old master fought well, but his final move was blocked. A future that had been complex, swirling, and impenetrable became clear as day to the young man. It was a future where he won, and he saw clearly that the old man could not counter it. He exulted, triumphant.</p>
<p>The old master sagged, defeated. From his perspective, the future would have turned murky, impossible to see. He knew he had lost, but he could not perceive by what path. A look of sorrow came to his eyes. "So be it. I cannot stop you."</p>
<p>If the old master had been anyone else, the young man would have killed him at that moment. But against a master of his level, this was again unnecessary.</p>
<p>These two, able to see and feel the future, could bargain in ways that others cannot. When an ordinary man makes a promise, there is no way to tell for sure if he will keep it. He might keep his word, or he could choose to break it. But the young man could see the future more clearly than any other living person. And the old master knew that the young man could see the future clearly. So if the old man made a promise, the young man could see if the old man intended to keep it. And so the old man would only make a promise he intended to keep. In fact, the only way to offer such a promise was to be the sort of person who would never break it.</p>
<p>The old man spoke. "I will not interfere with your task tonight. And I will retreat from the world for a time. You will not hear from me for many years, if at all. But I will not retreat entirely. I will watch at the corners, waiting. I will not strike at you, of course. But I may interfere, on occasion. In small ways."</p>
<p>"Why should I accept this? I could kill you now where you stand, and there is nothing you can do about it. You have no leverage."</p>
<p>"That is incorrect. I have one bit of leverage left, and I intend to use it. You still care about me after all these years. You never intended to kill me, merely to defeat me. You did not prepare yourself to kill me tonight."</p>
<p>The old man was right, of course. The young man believed in what he was doing, and he was willing to kill. His hands were covered in blood already, and they would see more before this night was done. But he came here knowing his old master would choose life over death if it came to it. Unconsciously, the young man had counted on it. He wanted his old master to see how strong he had become, and he wanted the old man to live to remember it.</p>
<p>And so, the old man had some leverage after all. Not much. But enough to bargain with. Truthfully, it was a bold proposal. The young man nearly rejected it. But the old man had crafted it cleverly. There would be no other offer. If the young man did not take the deal, there would be no option left but to kill the old man. The offer was a carefully calculated risk.</p>
<p>"Dammit old man. Even when I win, you manage to get the better of me."</p>
<p>* * *</p>
<p>Some time later, the old man sat in the grass, crying. He could hear crickets chirping. Nearby, an owl hooted.</p>
<p>Then he heard the screams start to come from the monastery. He had done all he could for them. It hadn't been enough.</p>

                </body>
                </html>